\chapter{Background and Motivation: Why Tabling?}

There is a flaw in the very foundations of Logic Programming: Prolog
is nondeclarative.  Of course, everyone knows that real Prolog as it
is used is nondeclarative.  Prolog programs abound with cuts, var
tests, asserts, and all kinds of ugly warts.  Everyone agrees that
Prolog should be more declarative and much research time has been
spent, and spent productively, trying to remedy these problems by
providing more declarative alternatives.  But I believe that there is
a more serious flaw closer to the heart of Prolog, right at its very
center, and this flaw has caused a number of problems in logic
programming.  I'm convinced that we must address this flaw, before we
can proceed together productively with logic programming.  Of course,
whether this is a ``flaw'' is in the eye of the beholder; we all have
arguments over whether a particular behavior is a bug or a feature.
As is clear from my presentation, I think I've found a bug; some of
you will think it's a feature.  Wherever we stand on this issue,
however, I believe we must be clear about its implications.  Only then
will we be able to communicate effectively about where LP is and where
it should go.

Let me also mention that I am by no means pointing out something new,
unknown to the community; rather I'm trying to raise our consciousness
about an inconsistency and its implications.

The problem is the very semantics of logic programming.  The
foundational results of our field show that for pure horn clauses, the
following are equivalent: logical implication, SLD resolution, and the
least fixpoint of the $T_p$ operator.  And logic programming basically
``works'' because SLD corresponds to computation (i.e. Prolog) {\em
and} to logical implication (truth in models).

But there is a fly in the ointment, the dirty secret that we Prolog
aficionados try to keep in the closet but Prolog programmers are all
too aware of.  Let's look more carefully at the full SLD tree, the
foundation for us Prolog hackers.  There are three kinds of paths in
an SLD tree: 1) those ending in success, 2) those ending in failure,
and 3) those not ending.  The foundational results tell us that those
ending in success correspond exactly to those instances of the query
that logically follow from the program.  This is fine and dandy and
certainly something we want and need.  But as programmers, that's not
enough.  We programmers also want, need actually, to distinguish
between paths that end in failure and paths that don't end at all.
When we run a program, and it responds `no', we may accept that
response as a good answer to our query.  But if it goes into an
infinite loop never coming back with an answer at all, we decide we
have a bug in our program and set out to fix it.  

So the problem with SLD is not that it doesn't do the right things for
success, but that it doesn't do the right thing with the other two
possible outcomes.  Note that this has nothing to do with how we
search the SLD tree, e.g. unfairly with depth first search or fairly
with breadth-first search; it's a property of the tree itself.  And it
has nothing to do with the fact that our theory deals best with ground
programs and Prolog programs deal with variables.  The problem
concerns which paths in the SLD tree are finite and which are
infinite.

In Prolog, as compared with other languages, it seems easier to write
partially correct programs, programs that, if they halt, they give the
right answers.  This comes from the power of declarative programming.
But it seems much harder to write and reason about totally correct
programs, programs that halt in all (the right) cases.  So it may be
the case that what we gain from declarativeness in our ability to
reason about the partial correctness of Prolog programs, we lose in
the difficulty of reasoning about total correctness.  Theoreticians
may accept partial correctness as good enough; but we users have to
know precisely how partial.

And sadly, the problems show up for very simple programs.  The issue
is clearly seen in transitive closure.  Consider the definition:

\begin{verbatim}
tca(X,Y) :- a(X,Y).
tca(X,Y) :- a(X,Z), tca(Z,Y).
\end{verbatim}

Prolog programmers know that this definition is fine when the
predicate ``a'' stands for ``parent'', and then ``tca'' is
``ancestor''.  But what happens if ``a'' is defined by the following
facts?

\begin{verbatim}
a(1,1).
a(2,1).
\end{verbatim}

Consider what happens when we ask the query: :- tca(1,2).  Prolog (that
is SLD resolution) goes into an infinite loop.  Are we as programmers
happy?  Do we say that since it hasn't returned, it must mean that you
can't get to 2 from 1 in this graph?  Not at all.  We turn back to fix
the program, probably modifying it by adding a loop-check.  That is,
we add a list of nodes to the predicate ``tca'', which contains the
nodes already visited.  Then before continuing to search from a node,
we check that it has not already been visited.  We're not happy until
our program responds `no' to our query.  So clearly the semantics of
our programming language is going to have to account for this.  And it
does.  We can't depend on the previously referenced foundational
results to give a semantics for pure Prolog as a programming language,
where we want to know what both `yes' and `no' answers mean.  The
theory must somehow be extended.  This was done in \cite{} by Kenneth Clark who defined
the completion of a program.  The semantics of (pure) Prolog programs
is normally taken to be the logical implications of the completion
(plus some standard axioms such as the unique names axiom.)  To find
the completion of our tca/2 program, we first convert the two
implication rules for tca/2 into the equivalent one implication with a
disjunction in the antecedent, and then we turn the implication into a
biconditional.  We do a similar transformation for a/2.  Then we take
the meaning of the program to be the logical implications of these
biconditionals (including some standard axioms).  And it is the case
that $\sim tca(1,2)$ is not logically implied by this theory (and
neither is tca(1,2), of course.)  So the completion semantics correctly
tells us that SLD will not terminate for this query.  And indeed
Prolog theoreticians (as well as the programmers) know that tca/2 as
defined above is NOT a general definition for transitive closure.
(But note that it {\em is} transitive closure if the graph is acyclic.
Maybe this is OK, since it is often the case that algorithms for
constrained data are simpler, but here it could be rather confusing, I
think.)

But in any case the Prolog community was (mostly) happy with this
situation, until the database people showed up and asked the obvious
question: Why doesn't the obvious two-line definition of tca/2 indeed
mean transitive closure?  (To some of us, it felt somewhat as though
they were pointing out that the emperor had no clothes.)  They pointed
out that if one uses the fixed point characterization from the
original foundation trilogy, instead of the SLD characterization, it
does.  Indeed, transitive closure is only the beginning; there are
many advantages in using this semantics.  {\em All} programs without
function symbols are terminating, and many simple programs now have a
natural programmers' semantics.  Indeed DCG's now {\em do} mean the
corresponding context free languages, whereas under the completion
semantics they don't always.  But even more important is what this
fixpoint semantics does to the theory of programs.  The theory is much
simpler, and accords with theory already developed.  E.g., automata
theory (e.g. CFL's) is now correctly reflected in LP.  And also
interestingly, this semantics leads the way for a theory of default
negation, which has blossomed.  This is because if we have a better
idea of when things are known false, the theory describing such
negative knowledge is simpler, more interesting, and perhaps even more
useful.

Actually, the situation for the completion is somewhat worse than
implied by the transitive closure example.  There are programs for
which Prolog goes into an infinite loop even though the completion of
the program determines all goals.  And this is {\em not} because
Prolog is depth-first; it's because its selection rule is
left-to-right.  To get Prolog actually to display the behavior
predicted by the completion, one would have to interleave computations
of all goal orderings, and fail a goal if any of the interleavings
failed.  This is hardly an attractive alternative for Prolog
implementors or programmers.

So I personally think minimal model semantics (i.e., the fixpoint
semantics) is better than the completion semantics for logic
programming.  I think the completion semantics is a bug, which should
be fixed, and it should be fixed by taking the fixpoint semantics.
There are those who either don't think this is a bug, or don't think
that this is a reasonable fix.  I certainly accept that the point is
arguable.  Going to the fixpoint semantics is a big step for at least
two reasons: 

\begin{itemize}
\item[Objection 1:] 
It violates a principle dear to the hearts of some theoretically
inclined logic programmers, that the meaning of a program consists of
the logical implications of the theory of the formulas making up the
program (or a simple transformation of them).

\item[Objection 2:]
It violates a principle dear to the hearts of some practically
inclined logic programmers (like me), that a program should have the
well-known procedural semantics, i.e., be executable by SLD resolution
(and WAM engines).

\end{itemize} 

The first objection is real and in some sense is not satisfactorily
solvable, I believe.  We know that there is no first-order theory that
characterizes transitive closure (the usual Prolog loop-check program
requires default negation.)  I will discuss some implications of this
later, and try to claim that things aren't so bad, but I can't say
they aren't true.  Basically, the purpose of this entire book is to
claim that the second objection can be overcome.  It is overcome by
using OLDT resolution \cite{} (or a generalizaiton SLG Resolution \cite{})
in place of SLD resolution in the foundational
theorems.  OLDT is a resolution strategy very similar to SLD, but one
that avoids redundant computation by remembering subcomputations and
reusing their results to respond to later requests.  This remembering
and reuse has been called memoization, tabling, lemmatization,
caching, well-formed substring tables, and probably a number of other
names.  With OLDT instead of SLD, the foundational theorem can be even
stronger, including a theorem relating OLDT failure leaves and the
fixpoint definition.

OLDT terminates (i.e., has only success and failure leaf nodes) for
all queries to programs that have finite minimal models, i.e. that
have a least fixpoint of finite size.  This guarantees total
correctness for the transitive closure definition (over finite
graphs).  Actually, even more can be said: OLDT terminates for all
queries to programs for which only a finite portion of the minimal
model is looked at; that is, for all programs with the Bounded Term
Size (BTS) property.  BTS is slightly circular, and undecidable, but
to me intuitively says that any finitary, constructive definition will
terminate.  (Admittedly, this is also somewhat circular.)

One thing that happens when we do not have first-order theories to
explain our semantics, i.e. the first objection above, is that we may
leave the realm of recursively enumerable sets.  That is, if we did have a first-order
theory to explain the semantics, then we'd know that a theorem-prover
could enumerate the theorems and the semantics would be r.e.  However,
by going to the minimal model semantics, we may (and do, when we add
negation) get non-r.e.~sets.  That is, we leave the realm of the
computable sets.  This might give pause to someone interested in
computation, because then we can write programs that aren't in
principle computable.  Note that this isn't a problem for totally
correct programs (which will be recursive programs), which are those
we usually want to write.  I guess that just as we rely on the
programmer to write programs that are terminating, we must rely on the
programmer to write programs that are computable.

SLDNF was the obvious (and perhaps only reasonable) extension of SLD
to include default negation.  If we are to base our new logic
programming on OLDT, the question arises as to how OLDT should be
extended to handle negation.  Given the theory of default negation
developed over the last several years, it seems that the well-founded
semantics is the appropriate semantics to compute for logic programs
with unconstrained negation.  (The other possible semantics is the
partial stable model semantics, but this is NP complete for
propositional programs, so may be not particularly appropriate for a
basic computational mechanism.)  For OLDT there have been several
proposals for computing the well-founded semantics, in particular
WELL! and XOLDTNF, which are quite similar.  The one I'm proposing
here is SLG, which I claim is the (or a) right one.  The simplest
reason that SLG is better than the previous two is that they are
exponential for general propositional normal programs, whereas SLG is
polynomial.  Also SLG produces a residual program when there are
undefined atoms in the well-founded models, and this residual program
can be further processed to find certain partial stable models.  So in
many cases SLG could be used as a preprocessor for a partial stable
model evaluator.

SLG implements the procedural interpretation of Horn clauses, with the
addition of tabling.  This is a more complex procedural interpretation
than SLDNF (and the procedural interpretation of negation makes it
even more complex), but I think it is indeed a procedural
interpretation and I think it is acceptable.  But this is not enough
to respond fully to objection 2 above.  The Prolog programmers want to
know if SLG can be implemented so that it is efficient enough to
compete with Prolog, (or actually efficient enough to compete with
C++, perhaps our {\em true} competitor.)  I think the answer is `yes'.
Actually, even more than that, I think it will be the case that we
will be able to construct an engine that for many useful problems will
be significantly faster than Prolog.  And these problems will be in
what has historically been logic programming's core applications:
natural language, AI search, knowledge bases, and databases.
The examples in this book
will indicate in detail where some of the problems lie.  There is much
work to do, but I will claim that results we already have in the XSB
project indicate that it will definitely be possible.

The approach is to take SLG as the basic computation strategy, and to
use SLDNF as an optimization.  So when SLDNF can be proved to have the
same behavior as SLG, then we can use it and get current Prolog
speeds.  To do this we need an implementation that fully and closely
integrates SLG and SLD, allowing them to be used interchangably and
intermixedly.  And that is what SLG resolution supports and its
implementation in XSB achieves.
